{{subst:submit}}
{{short description|American education technology analyst and town moderator}}
{{Use mdy dates|date=June 2026}}

'''Jeffrey Alderson''' is an American education technology analyst, former United States Air Force officer, and municipal official in Natick, Massachusetts. He has worked in education technology and interoperability, including as technical architect for the New York implementation of [[inBloom]], as a principal analyst for Eduventures, and as product manager for MATLAB Grader at MathWorks. He was elected town moderator of Natick in 2025.

== Education and military service ==

Alderson graduated from [[Worcester Polytechnic Institute]] after attending on an Air Force scholarship and studying electrical and computer engineering.<ref name="NatickVeterans">{{cite web |title=Jeff Alderson, Air Force veteran |url=https://natickveterans.com/2026/01/29/jeffrey-alderson/ |website=Natick Veterans Oral History Project |date=January 29, 2026 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> He later earned a Master of Education in education policy, organization, and leadership from the [[University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign]].<ref name="MathWorksAI">{{cite web |title=Enhancing Teaching and Learning with MATLAB Copilot and Simulink Copilot |url=https://www.mathworks.com/videos/enhancing-teaching-and-learning-with-generative-ai-and-matlab-1758823408469.html |website=MathWorks |date=May 28, 2026 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> He joined the [[United States Air Force]] in 1998, was deployed twice to the Middle East to help build computer systems, and left the service in 2003 as a captain.<ref name="NatickVeterans" />

== Education technology career ==

InBloom was a student-data initiative launched at SXSW EDU in 2013 after the rebranding of the Shared Learning Collaborative.<ref name="SXSW">{{cite web |last=Reed |first=Ron |title=10 Things You Probably Don't Know About SXSW EDU |url=https://sxswedu.com/news/2020/10-things-you-probably-dont-know-about-sxsw-edu/ |website=SXSW EDU |date=January 28, 2020 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> ''Education Week'' reported in 2014 that inBloom was backed by $100 million in grants from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Carnegie Corporation of New York, formed partnerships with nine states, and later lost support amid student-data privacy concerns.<ref name="EducationWeek">{{cite web |last=Kamisar |first=Ben |title=InBloom Sputters Amid Concerns About Privacy of Student Data |url=https://www.edweek.org/technology/inbloom-sputters-amid-concerns-about-privacy-of-student-data/2014/01 |website=Education Week |date=January 7, 2014 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref>

In a 2017 Data & Society Research Institute working paper on the legacy of inBloom, Alderson was identified as a former lead architect at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, formerly Choice Solutions, and as the technical architect for the New York implementation of inBloom.<ref name="DataSociety">{{cite report |last1=Bulger |first1=Monica |last2=McCormick |first2=Patrick |last3=Pitcan |first3=Mikaela |title=The Legacy of inBloom |publisher=Data & Society Research Institute |date=February 2, 2017 |url=https://datasociety.net/pubs/ecl/InBloom_feb_2017.pdf |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> The report's appendix listed his role during inBloom as chief solutions architect at ConnectEDU and lead architect at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, and listed his then-current role as principal analyst of enterprise software at Eduventures.<ref name="DataSociety" />

In a 2008 guest contribution about a PESC-hosted Washington briefing on student-record exchange standards, Jim Farmer wrote that Alderson, then with ConnectEDU, said the company wanted to achieve electronic exchange among servicers and later connect directly to colleges and universities using standards.<ref name="Farmer">{{cite web |last=Farmer |first=Jim |title=Bologna: are European entrepreneurs now leading the US on the development of Higher Education student record software? Guest Contribution by Jim Farmer |url=https://schmoller.net/fm.schmoller.net/2008/06/washington-rs3g.html |website=Fortnightly Mailing |date=June 15, 2008 |access-date=June 9, 2026}}</ref> A 2009 PESC Functional Acknowledgment Workgroup record listed Alderson, then with ConnectEDU, among workgroup presenters.<ref name="PESCFAW">{{cite web |title=PESC Functional Acknowledgment Workgroup CCB Review |url=https://studylib.net/doc/8601923/pesc-functional-acknowledgment-workgroup-ccb-review |website=StudyLib |date=March 30, 2009 |access-date=June 9, 2026}}</ref> In 2013, a PESC publication listed Alderson as senior director of product innovation at ConnectEDU for MyData,<ref name="PESC2013">{{cite web |title=February 2013 - PESC |url=https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/read/38261340/february-2013-pesc/7 |website=Yumpu |publisher=Postsecondary Electronic Standards Council |date=February 2013 |access-date=June 9, 2026}}</ref> and an agenda for the National Center for Education Statistics Management Information Systems Conference listed him in a MyDataButton session with representatives from PESC and eScholar.<ref name="NCES2013">{{cite conference |title=26th Annual Management Information Systems (MIS) Conference agenda |conference=Management Information Systems Conference |publisher=National Center for Education Statistics |date=2013 |url=https://nces.ed.gov/whatsnew/conferences/pdf/MIS_2013_Agenda.pdf |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref>

In 2016, ''Campus Technology'' reported on an Eduventures report about learning management systems and identified Alderson as the report's author and principal analyst.<ref name="CampusTechnology">{{cite web |last=Schaffhauser |first=Dian |title=Eduventures Publishes Report on Learning Management Systems |url=https://campustechnology.com/articles/2016/01/28/eduventures-publishes-report-on-learning-management-systems.aspx |website=Campus Technology |date=January 28, 2016 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> The publication also quoted Alderson in an article about higher-education analytics, identifying him as an Eduventures principal analyst.<ref name="CampusTechnologyAnalytics">{{cite web |last=Raths |first=David |title=Laying the Groundwork for Big Data |url=https://campustechnology.com/articles/2016/02/25/laying-the-groundwork-for-big-data.aspx?Page=3&p=1 |website=Campus Technology |date=February 25, 2016 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> MIT Open Learning later listed Alderson as product manager for MATLAB Grader at MathWorks for a 2021 panel on engineering education after COVID-19.<ref name="MITOpenLearning">{{cite web |title=The Evolution of Engineering Education Post-COVID-19 |url=https://openlearning.mit.edu/events/evolution-engineering-education-post-covid-19 |website=MIT Open Learning |date=March 22, 2021 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> In an August/September 2021 article, ''Mechanical Engineering'' identified him as a MathWorks product manager and quoted him on remote engineering education, online learning, and student access to industry-style tools.<ref name="ASMEFutureReady">{{cite magazine |last=O'Heir |first=Jeff |title=Future Ready |url=https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2021-Sept2 |magazine=Mechanical Engineering |volume=143 |issue=5 |pages=38-43 |date=August/September 2021 |doi=10.1115/1.2021-Sept2 |access-date=June 9, 2026}}</ref>

== Municipal service ==

Alderson was listed as an uncontested candidate for a three-year term as Natick town moderator in the town's 2025 election.<ref name="ElectionGuide">{{cite web |last=Brown |first=Deborah |title=Natick 2025 town election guide: $7M override question; contested races; where to vote |url=https://www.natickreport.com/2025/03/natick-2025-town-election-guide-7mil-override-question-contested-races-where-to-vote/ |website=Natick Report |date=March 25, 2025 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref> After the election, ''Natick Report'' described outgoing moderator Frank Foss handing the Town Meeting gavel to incoming moderator Jeff Alderson when newly elected officials were sworn in.<ref name="Gavel">{{cite web |last=Brown |first=Bob |title=Natick swears in newly elected officials, transfers the moderator's gavel |url=https://www.natickreport.com/2025/03/natick-swears-in-newly-elected-officials-transfers-the-moderators-gavel/ |website=Natick Report |date=March 27, 2025 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref>

In November 2025, ''Natick Report'' reported that Alderson, as town moderator, sought Town Meeting members to apply for a new Hybrid Town Meeting Committee, whose work would include studying a framework for hybrid town meetings in Natick.<ref name="Hybrid">{{cite web |last=Brown |first=Bob |title=Volunteers sought to join Natick Hybrid Town Meeting Committee |url=https://www.natickreport.com/2025/11/volunteers-sought-to-join-natick-hybrid-town-meeting-committee/ |website=Natick Report |date=November 20, 2025 |access-date=June 8, 2026}}</ref>

== References ==

{{reflist}}

<!-- Categories should be added only after AfC review and acceptance. Possible categories may include:
[[Category:Living people]]
[[Category:Worcester Polytechnic Institute alumni]]
[[Category:United States Air Force officers]]
[[Category:People from Natick, Massachusetts]]
-->
