{{Short description|American a cappella group}}
{{Infobox musical artist <!-- See Wikipedia:WikiProject_Musicians -->
| name                = Overboard
| image                 =
| caption            = Harmony Sweepstakes Nationals<br />May 2011
| image_size            = 200 px
| background          = group_or_band
| alias               = 
| origin              = [[Boston]], Massachusetts, [[United States|USA]]
| instrument          = [[Vocal music|Voices]]
| genre               = [[a cappella]]
| occupation          = 
| years_active        = 2006–present
| label               = 
| associated_acts     = 
| website                 = {{URL|overboardvocals.com}}
| current_members     = Caleb Whelden<br />Johanna Vinson<br />Sam Fischer<br />Eric Morrissey<br />Tracy Robertson
| 
}}
'''Overboard''' is an [[a cappella]] group based in [[Boston, Massachusetts]].<ref>{{Cite web |title=Overboard: Boston a cappella group singing contemporary pop/rock music. |url=https://www.overboardvocals.com/ |website=overboardvocals.com}}</ref>

== History ==

Founded by Nicholas Girard in the spring of 2006, Overboard was first conceived as a street performance group intent on entertaining audiences around coastal [[New England]] during the summer months. The group's first album, ''Shipwrecked'', was released during that summer and was distributed during the group's frequent [[busking]] stops in [[Newburyport, Massachusetts]], [[Freeport, Maine]] and [[Burlington, Vermont]], as well as around their hometown of Boston.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Fleming |first=Deirdre |date=2010-03-18 |title=Harmonic convergence for men of Overboard |url=http://pressherald.mainetoday.com/story.php?id=166253&ac=MaineLife&pg=1 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20140517165927/http://www.pressherald.com/archive/harmonic-convergence-for-men-of-overboard_2008-01-31.html |archive-date=2014-05-17 |website=[[Portland Press Herald]]}}</ref> On the heels of their successful first summer, the group decided to continue performing together on a more permanent basis.<ref>{{Cite web |last=Nierstedt |first=Jenna |date=2 February 2009 |title=Singing all the way to the bank |url=http://blastmagazine.com/the-magazine/entertainment/music/2009/02/singing-all-the-way-to-the-bank/ |website=Blast Magazine}}</ref>

In February 2007, Overboard began recording its second album, ''Stranded'', which was released that May. To promote the album, the group performed at a variety of venues throughout New England starting with their appearance at Eggstock, an annual environmental awareness festival held at Flamig Farm in [[Simsbury, Connecticut]] where they sang the [[Beatles]]' "[[Here Comes the Sun]]" to commemorate the unveiling of the state's first commercial Solar [[Photovoltaic]] System. Then, in July, the group performed for audiences at [[Middlesex School]] Summer Arts Camp in [[Concord, Massachusetts]] and at Idol Camp, organized by the producers of ''[[American Idol]]'' and held on one of the campuses of the [[Northfield Mount Hermon School]] in [[Northfield, Massachusetts]].<ref>{{Cite web |last=Young |first=Emily |date=2008-01-10 |title=Who's that band? |url=http://www.newburyportnews.com/pulife/local_story_010093957 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20131021043412/http://www.newburyportnews.com/lifestyle/x845835013/Whos-that-band |archive-date=2013-10-21 |website=newburyportnew.com}}</ref> On December 14, 2007, the group was selected as a top five finalist in the [[CBS]] ''[[Early Show]]'' A Cappella Quest competition hosted by [[Boyz II Men]].<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/12/14/earlyshow/leisure/music/main3618694.shtml |title="A Cappella Quest" Down To Five Finalists, Boyz II Men To Announce Winner On The Early Show Monday - CBS News |website=www.cbsnews.com |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20071218112210/http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/12/14/earlyshow/leisure/music/main3618694.shtml |archive-date=2007-12-18}}</ref>

At the 2008 Boston regional [[Harmony Sweepstakes A Cappella Festival]] held at [[Tufts University]], Overboard placed third.<ref>{{Cite web |title=Harmony Sweepstakes a Cappella Festival Boston Regional |url=http://www.harmony-sweepstakes.com/boston/boston2008.html |website=harmony-sweepstakes.com}}</ref> That spring, the group followed up their Harmony Sweepstakes participation with performances for a series of charitable organizations, including concerts for the [[Avon foundation]] Breast Cancer Crusade, the [[American Cancer Society]] [[Relay for Life]] and the opening ceremonies of [[Special Olympics]] of Massachusetts Summer Games.

Overboard's third album, ''Castaways'', a compilation of oldies and a cappella standards, was released in September 2008. Their fourth album, ''Tidings'', a collection of holiday songs, was released in November 2008. Tidings received a [[Contemporary A Cappella Recording Award]] (CARA) nomination for Best Holiday Album<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/node/1656 |title=2009 Contemporary A Cappella Recording Award Nominees {{!}} The Contemporary A Cappella Society |website=www.casa.org |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20090205013101/http://casa.org/node/1656 |archive-date=2009-02-05}}</ref> and won a CARA for Best Holiday Song ("We Three Kings").<ref>{{Cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/node/4878 |title=2009 Contemporary a Cappella Recording Award Winners &#124; A Cappella Music - the Contemporary a Cappella Society |access-date=2009-05-05 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160508135907/http://www.casa.org/node/4878 |archive-date=2016-05-08 |url-status=dead }}</ref>  In 2009, the track was chosen for ''CASC:  Christmas A Cappella Volume 1'', an international holiday compilation album co-released by [[Contemporary A Cappella Society|CASA]] and A Cappella Records.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/node/6170 |title=CASA Collection (CASC) {{!}} A Cappella Music - The Contemporary A Cappella Society |website=www.casa.org |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20091221175322/http://www.casa.org/node/6170 |archive-date=2009-12-21}}</ref>

Begun in the spring of 2009, Overboard's fifth album, ''Help!'', was inspired by the release of the newly remastered [[The Beatles|Beatles]] repertoire and [[Harmonix Music Systems|Harmonix's]] ''[[The Beatles: Rock Band|The Beatles Rock Band]]'' music video game. ''Help!'' was envisioned as a [[rock opera]]/[[concept album]], in a similar vein to [[The Who|The Who's]] ''[[Tommy (The Who album)|Tommy]]'' and [[Pink Floyd]]'s ''[[The Wall]]''. Through original arrangements, Overboard reinterpreted pieces of over forty Beatles songs and sounds in order to provide a soundtrack to the imagined backdrop of a tempestuous love affair between [[Billy Shears]] and [[Eleanor Rigby]].<ref>{{Cite web |date= |title=Girard High School Marching Band |url=http://girardmusic.com/ |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160110025213/http://girardmusic.com/ |archive-date=2016-01-10 |access-date= |website=girardmusic.com}}</ref>

Overboard released ''Help!'' in November 2009.  Inspired by the success of [[Radiohead]]'s digital release of ''[[In Rainbows]]'', Overboard distributed free digital downloads of the entirety of ''Help!'' on their website for a limited time.  In February 2010, ''Help!'' was nominated for CARAs for Best Pop/Rock Album and Best Pop/Rock Song ("Hello Goodbye").<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/cara2010n |title=2010 Contemporary A Cappella Recording Award Nominees {{!}} A Cappella Music - The Contemporary A Cappella Society |website=www.casa.org |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20100204095253/http://www.casa.org/cara2010n |archive-date=2010-02-04}}</ref>  [[Contemporary A Cappella Society|CASA's]] A Cappella Community Awards (ACAs) recognized Overboard again in 2010 with 8 nominations, as voted by a cappella experts and fans.  For the 2010 ACAs, "Help!" was recognized as runner-up for Best Album and group founder, Nick Girard, tied as runner-up for Best Male Vocalist.

In September 2010, Overboard began a year-long project entitled "Free Track Tuesday." Every Tuesday on the group's website, a new track, arranged, recorded and produced entirely by Overboard members, is released as a free digital download.  The project was inspired in part by [[Starbucks|Starbucks']] Free Music Tuesday program.  Three tracks from the first quarter of Free Track Tuesday garnered one 2011 CARA award, for the traditional spiritual "[[Amazing Grace]]," and two runners-up awards, for [[Toxic (song)|"Toxic"]] (originally performed by [[Britney Spears]]) and "Used To Love U" (originally performed by [[John Legend]]).<ref>{{Cite web |title=2011 Contemporary A Cappella Recording Award Winners |url=http://www.casa.org/cara2011 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120314165439/http://www.casa.org/cara2011 |archive-date=2012-03-14 |website=casa.org}}</ref>

In recognition of their performances, recordings and production work, Overboard received 10 2011 ACA nominations, including Favorite Pop/Rock Group, Favorite Mashup ([[25 or 6 to 4]]/[[Babe I'm Gonna Leave You]]) and Favorite A Cappella Song That Doesn't Sound A Cappella ([[Hedwig's Theme]] from [[Harry Potter]]). Individual achievement nominations were also given to Alfredo Austin (Favorite Rap Performance), Scott Cobban (Favorite Vocal Percussionist) and Nick Girard (Favorite Male Vocalist, Favorite Arranger, Favorite A Cappella Producer).<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/aca2011n |title=2011 A Cappella Community Awards Nominees {{!}} A Cappella Music - The Contemporary A Cappella Society |website=www.casa.org |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110425195014/http://www.casa.org/aca2011n |archive-date=2011-04-25}}</ref>

==Recent and upcoming events==

Following the [[2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami]] in Japan, Overboard launched a project called HOPE to raise money for the [[American Red Cross|American Red Cross']] relief efforts. In exchange for donating, contributors are given access to successive tiers of rewards, including a digital download of the group's special release album ''Hope.'' 100% of the proceeds from HOPE are donated the Red Cross' earthquake and tsunami relief efforts.<ref>{{Cite web |title=Help Overboard Help Japan |url=http://www.overboardvocals.com/help-japan.php |website=overboardvocals.com}}</ref>

On April 17, 2011, Overboard won 1st Place at the Boston Regional Harmony Sweepstakes Festival. In addition to winning the overall competition, the group also won Audience Favorite and Best Arrangement (for [[All for Love (song)|All For Love]]). Overboard competed at the Harmony Sweepstakes Festival's National Finals on May 14, 2011.<ref>{{Cite web |title=2011 National Finals Harmony Sweepstakes A Cappella Festival |url=https://www.harmony-sweepstakes.com/regionals/?region=National+Finals&year=2011 |website=harmony-sweepstakes.com}}</ref>

==Overboard Productions==

Through the Free Track Tuesday program, group members have become more involved in the recording side of a cappella and now do freelance production work for [[collegiate a cappella]] and professional a cappella groups.  Clients include groups such as [[Yale University|Yale University's]] [[The Whiffenpoofs]] and [[Mixed Company of Yale]], as well as [[Brown University|Brown University's]] [[The Brown Derbies]].<ref>{{Cite web |title=Overboard a cappella productions |url=http://www.overboardvocals.com/productions.php |website=overboardvocals.com}}</ref>  A recent Overboard Productions release, a cover of [[Katy Perry|Katy Perry's]] hit song ''[[Firework (song)|Firework]]'' performed by [[Ithaca College|Ithaca College's]] Ithacappella and Premium Blend a cappella groups reached [[iTunes|iTunes']] Top 200.<ref>{{cite web |url=http://www.casa.org/content/cappella-killing-itunes-charts |title=A Cappella killing in the iTunes charts {{!}} A Cappella Music - The Contemporary A Cappella Society |website=www.casa.org |url-status=dead |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20110214011547/http://www.casa.org/content/cappella-killing-itunes-charts |archive-date=2011-02-14}}</ref> Proceeds of the song are donated to [[The Trevor Project]], an organization focused on suicide prevention efforts among [[LGBTQ]] youth.

Overboard Productions edited and mixed the backing track to the [[University of St Andrews]]' [[The Other Guys (University of St Andrews)|The Other Guys]]' [[viral video]] ''Royal Romance''. Released to commemorate the [[wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton]], ''Royal Romance'' is a [[Mashup (music)|mashup]] of [[Lady Gaga]]'s ''[[Bad Romance]]'', [[Michael Jackson]]'s ''[[Billie Jean]]'' and [[Gustav Holst]]'s ''[[I Vow To Thee, My Country]]'' The video was released on April 12, 2011, and received over 100,000 views in the first week.<ref>{{Cite magazine|url=https://www.billboard.com/music/music-news/st-andrews-a-cappella-group-caught-in-royal-romance-with-kate-472006/|title=St. Andrews a Cappella Group Caught in 'Royal Romance' with Kate Middleton|magazine=[[Billboard (magazine)|Billboard]]|date=18 April 2011}}</ref> Clips of the video were also featured on [[The Today Show]].<ref>{{Cite web |title=Video Player |url=http://www.nbcnews.com/id/21134540/ |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20130129090138/http://www.nbcnews.com/id/21134540/ |archive-date=2013-01-29 |website=NBCNews.com}}</ref>

== Awards ==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Year
! Presenter
! Award
! Result
|-
| 2007
| CBS Early Show & Boyz II Men
| A Cappella Quest Competition
| Top 5 Finalists
|-
| 2008
| Harmony Sweepstakes A Cappella Festival
| Boston Regional Winner
| 3rd Place
|-
| rowspan="2"| 2009
| rowspan="2"| Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards of CASA
| Best Holiday Album
| Nominated, "Tidings"
|-
| Best Holiday Song
| Won, "We Three Kings"
|-
| rowspan="2"| 2010
| rowspan="2"| Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards of CASA
| Best Pop/Rock Album
| Nominated, "Help!"
|-
| Best Pop/Rock Song
| Nominated, "Hello Goodbye"
|-
| 2010
| Harmony Sweepstakes A Cappella Festival
| Boston Regional Winner
| 3rd Place
|-
| rowspan="9"| 2010
| rowspan="9"| A Cappella Community Awards
|-
| Favorite Professional Album
| Runner-Up, "Help!"
|-
| Favorite Male Vocalist
| Runner-Up, Nick Girard
|-
|Favorite Pop/Rock Group
|Nominated
|-
|Favorite Vocal Percussionist
| Nominated, Scott Cobban
|-
| Favorite Arranger
| Nominated, Nick Girard
|-
| Favorite Medley
| Nominated, "Good Night" (from "Help!")
|-
| Most Cutting Edge Group
| Nominated
|-
| Favorite Arrangement
| Nominated, "Hello Goodbye" (from "Help!")
|-
| rowspan="3"| 2011
| rowspan="3"| Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards of CASA
| Best Religious Song
| Won, "Amazing Grace"
|-
| Best Jazz Song
| Runner-Up, "Toxic"
|-
| Best R&B/Hip Hop Song
| Runner-Up, "Used to Love U"
|-
| rowspan="3"| 2011
| rowspan="3"| Harmony Sweepstakes A Cappella Festival
| Boston Regional Winner
| 1st Place
|-
| Audience Favorite
| 1st Place 
|-
| Best Arrangement
| 1st Place, "All for Love"
|-
| rowspan="11"| 2011
| rowspan="11"| A Cappella Community Awards
|-
| Favorite Pop/Rock Group
| Nominated
|-
| Favorite Male Vocalist
| Nominated, Nick Girard
|-
| Favorite Vocal Percussionist
| Nominated, Scott Cobban
|-
| Favorite Rap Performance
| Nominated, Alfredo Austin for "Baby"
|-
| Favorite Arranger
| Nominated, Nick Girard
|-
| Favorite A Cappella Producer
| Nominated, Nick Girard
|-
| Favorite Mashup
| Runner-Up, "25 or 6 to 4/Babe I'm Gonna Leave You"
|-
| Favorite Gender Bender Solo
| Runner-Up, "Toxic"
|-
| Favorite A Cappella Song That Doesn't Sound A Cappella
| Won, "Hedwig's Theme"
|-
| Favorite Live Performance Moment
| Nominated, Help! at the Las Vegas A Cappella Summit
|-
| rowspan="3"| 2012
| rowspan="3"| Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards of CASA
| Best Rap/Hip Hop Song
| Runner Up, "How Low"
|-
| Best Folk/World Song
| Nominated, "Hengilas"
|-
| Best Pop/Rock Song
| Nominated, "Moves Like Jagger"
|-
| rowspan="3"| 2013
| rowspan="3"| Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards of CASA
| Best Hip Hop/R&B Song
| Nominated, "All of the Lights" (produced by Plaid Productions)
|}

== Discography ==

* ''Shipwrecked'' (2006)
* ''Stranded'' (2007)
* ''Castaways'' (2008)
* ''Tidings'' (2008)
* ''Help!'' (2009)
* Free Track Tuesday (2010–2011)
* ''Hope'' (special release album, 2011)

== References ==

{{reflist|2}}

== External links ==

*{{official website|http://www.overboardvocals.com}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Overboard (A Cappella)}}
[[Category:A cappella musical groups]]